Cheat... from company especially telecom  creditor...
Look at this scenario in the event coming up ...
      Kwame borrowed bread in the morning ,feeling of hunger at time subsided[stop]  around the clock .Kwame did not eat the bread he borrowed .Assuming the bread  is
 nonperishable food  will bread still not be there if not eaten .At noon he decides to pay the breadseller  won't his bread still remain if not eaten?
But the telecom company allow one to borrow airtime say GHC6 for some call . The borrower should have airtime intact if the airtime is not used. 
The borrower will have a personal account with  total balance of airtime  being Ghc - 6.60 .
No body said they should  not take their interest and their borrowed amount .But what is wrong one will say .Something is wrong can't you see. 
Assuming repaying  my debt with amount of Ghc -6.6 .As borrower ,why won't the company  take amount paid amount and leave my previous borrowed airtime  
total balance as GH 6 and not Ghc 0.00  if not used or even if some is used the rest should remain .So they take both amount borrowed [which negated as -Ghc 6.6]  and 
then the repayed amount which is GHc6.6 leaving the borrower nothing.[That is total =6.6-6.6=0.00]. The borrower account is Ghc 0.00 
.They force borrower to  stick to what they want user to follow and not allowing user  to do  what he or she want  to do with the airtime borrowed.
Is it not against our right ! There must be course for action to make recommendation for ammendment... in the years to come.

Picking from another angle, taking a loan from bank is another story that help us to understand my case to what most telecom creditor of airtime  do .
Manu took GHC 50 money from his bank  to buy some goods  and reaching home he left the money there.Now the bank gives interest of let say Ghc5. 
If one day, Kwame decides to pay his debt the total will be Ghc of 55 cedis per mere calculation .
Leaving home for the event  ,he Kwame a mobile-worker-musician turned now not interested in using the money to buy goods but yet left the borrowed money home .
Kwame went to the  event and there his music talent is made known at the event,his[Kwame] boss  Mintah who is manager for the event paid Kwame's wage  of  Ghc 55 to him.
Kwame now  rushed to the bank to pay his debt of Ghc 55 to the bank .
Think critically ,will the bank come home and collect the  borrowed amount he left home while going for event at Mintah's place?.
But telecom company opposite to the bank take the borrowed amount and the amount paid later to settle the debt... 
Is it fair? You dont let us  have access   to the borrowed amount but restrict user...Is it fair?