

Google Lead Club Program 
Date: 21 st October 2023.
A watch shown us how KNUST learners did navigation app on campus.

Hacktoberfest:
Open Source Project 
By Digital Ocean
hacktoberfest:
In 2013 by Digital Ocean.
Here contributing to open source.
Open Source Software =Freeware Vs Open Source.
Freeware: a software avail for free no source code is available.
Open source =code is available  for all for modification.
Free redistribution:can sell  even lengthy code.
Source code:only code 
Derived work:allow modification and distibute under same licenses.
Integrity of the Author's source code:may restrict us  but may if is patch files source code modification.credit the author.
No discrimination against persons or group:licences show no  discrimination.
No discrimination against against fields of Endeavor : not restrict any field committed effort.
Distribution license
License must be for a particular project.
License should restrict other software.
License must be technological neutral :should be neutral to all.


Reasons for open source:

*Number and activity ,innovation and creativity:
A lot of people are involved so smart ones make it better.eg chromium in google

Open Source/:
Maintainer -individuals or Org.[in eg goolge
contributors:add code
Donors eg fake.js download: [give money].
Partners: facilitator make move in project eg Google may want to be partners
License:govern the project

Why contibute to Open Source :
We all benefit.
Networking &Opportunities: jobs ,mentorship
Sharpen Your skills :git best pracitces-PR &commits
Coding
Improve open source software: fix bugs,add slick features,improve UX and documentation.

What you can do'
documentation works:adding bits to ... it
user experience 
Blog and Tutorials:made known contribution to others
case studies;
graphic design
Translation 
eg 23 sept and 31
eg hacktoberfest

issues:
contibution to repo
Project manager has to accept them 
Be yond Fest:website
MLH fellowship
Outreachy
Google Summer Of Code
faddal Explained it nicely but other thing yet all the lead brush it off.


Reading More: On Open Source:
term of:
Use 
Modify
Redistribute
Bazaar model to open source:
They say open source is not democratic.
Out of 31999 programmers only 10% do write code for a repo or make contribution to project.Average is 5.1 with 2 being the median.
Out of open Ray Eric think Bazaar model [Traditional like model]
Some -tips of bazaar model
*Make other co-developers
*Early release
*Automated integration
*several versions
*High modularzation:easy devt of each component.
*Dynamic decision making structure.


Benefit of open source:
*More collaboration
*Better soft than proprietary software
*More flexible
*Innovation plus creativity
*Low cost
*Easy access to software
*Startup are more
*Company may break but code exist

Free software pay more atttention to customers and with time the software decay or degrade leading the breakdown of company.
Version control has keep changes made.It keep track of all act of code. 
Tools
Subversion [svn] keep current and historical  version of source code.
 Concurrent Version System: keep upto date changes.When conflict occur it has tob edit manually.

Source code hosting facilities :Project in repo... in Github,GitLab.BugZilla track bugs
Mailing list and IRC ensure coordination among developers. 

