Babylon is a country which lacks everything yet became glamorous.
It show man's ability to achieve great objectives given at his disposal.
Just opposing unless is given from above you cannot do anything.
Through human igenuity [fertile land and water]  was used to improve Babylon. Engineering at its high stake was higher  and they diverted water through canal or dams to water  their crops.
The country offered defensive attack towards those who want to conquer them.
Apart being a wealthy known country , is a dwelling place for none.
The ihabitant of Babylon were not barbarian but educated people who living within protecting walls.
Best of Engineers,Mathematician ,Astronomers first people to have written language.
It was not heard that Babylon was ever conquered but is no more. 
It had organized soldiers like this modern day .It took 2 or 3 years  for preparation of weapon and in addition food for the soldiers.
Shops and streets exited there.
The Babylonian were highly advanced in every sector of their survival .
Weapon like spears,arrow and other well written clay tablet in their bossom. 
Man who desired Gold:
Poor .Yes. A man with job yet in poverty and his wife show an evidence that the meal bag empty- so he must get to work  to yield some for his house. 
Similarly ,his mind is somewhere battling tough question no examiner gave. Thinking.'Why cant we also acquire money to buy thing needed' said the Man to his friend a musician.He [Man] deos not understand why they all start at same time yet others are richer than others. He still contends it...
The man and his friend on way from being poor to becoming rich went to humble rich man [Arkad] to learn since  is not expensive to do so..
'He, God was content to let us continue thus. Now, at last, we see a light, 
bright like that from the rising sun. It biddeth us to learn more that we may 
prosper more. With a new understanding we shall find honourable ways to 
accomplish our desires.'

Richest Man iN Babylon:
To achieve  something what required is time and study .
Study is about what we know and the training to find what we dont know.
'All that you have is yours to keep'.